<!-- This file is autogenerated. See CONTRIBUTING.md for instructions to add an entry. -->

# Go API Changelog

This changelog includes only developer-facing changes.
If you are looking for user-facing changes, check out [CHANGELOG.md](./CHANGELOG.md).

<!-- next version -->

## v1.48.0/v0.142.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `pdata/xpdata`: Rename `Entity.IDAttributes()` to `Entity.IdentifyingAttributes()` and `Entity.DescriptionAttributes()` to `Entity.DescriptiveAttributes()` to align with OpenTelemetry specification terminology for attributes. (#14275)
- `pkg/exporterhelper`: Use `configoptional.Optional` for the `exporterhelper.QueueBatchConfig` (#14155)
  It's recommended to change the field type in your component configuration to be `configoptional.Optional[exporterhelper.QueueBatchConfig]` to keep the `enabled` subfield. Use configoptional.Some(exporterhelper.NewDefaultQueueConfig()) to enable by default. Use configoptional.Default(exporterhelper.NewDefaultQueueConfig()) to disable by default.
  

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `pkg/service`: Deprecate Settings.LoggingOptions and telemetry.LoggerSettings.ZapOptions, add telemetry.LoggerSettings.BuildZapLogger (#14002)
  BuildZapLogger provides a more flexible way to build the Zap logger,
  since the function will have access to the zap.Config. This is used
  in otelcol to install a Windows Event Log output when the zap config
  does not specify any file output.
  

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata/pprofile`: add ProfileCount() (#14239)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `pkg/confmap`: Ensure that embedded structs are not overwritten after Unmarshal is called (#14213)
  This allows embedding structs which implement Unmarshal and contain a configopaque.String.
  

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.47.0/v0.141.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `pkg/config/configgrpc`: Replace `component.Host` parameter of ToServer/ToClientConn by map of extensions (#13640)
  Components must now pass the map obtained from the host's `GetExtensions` method
  instead of the host itself.
  
  Nil may be used in tests where no middleware or authentication extensions are used.
  
- `pkg/config/confighttp`: Replace `component.Host` parameter of ToServer/ToClient by map of extensions (#13640)
  Components must now pass the map obtained from the host's `GetExtensions` method
  instead of the host itself.
  
  Nil may be used in tests where no middleware or authentication extensions are used.
  

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `pkg/pdata`: Deprecate profile.Duration() and profile.SetDuration() (#14188)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce `MergeTo` method (#14091)
- `pkg/pdata`: Add profile.DurationNano() and profile.SetDurationNano() (#14188)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.46.0/v0.140.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `pdata/pprofile`: Upgrade the OTLP protobuf definitions to version 1.9.0 (#14128)
  * Drop field `CommentStrindices` in `Profile`.
  * Rename `Sample` to `Samples` in `Profile`.
  * Rename `Line` to `Lines` in `Location`.
  * Remove `AggregationTemporality` field in `ValueType`.
  
  See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/releases/tag/v1.9.0
  
- `pkg/otelcol`: The `otelcol.Factories.Telemetry` field is now required (#14003)
  Previously if this field was not set, then it would default to an otelconftelemetry factory.
  Callers of the otelcol package must now set the field explicitly.
  

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pkg/pdata`: Upgrade the OTLP protobuf definitions to version 1.9.0 (#14128)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.45.0/v0.139.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `all`: Change type of `configgrpc.ClientConfig.Headers`, `confighttp.ClientConfig.Headers`, and `confighttp.ServerConfig.ResponseHeaders` (#13930)
  `configopaque.MapList` is a new alternative to `map[string]configopaque.String` which can unmarshal
  both maps and lists of name/value pairs.
  
  For example, if `headers` is a field of type `configopaque.MapList`,
  then the following YAML configs will unmarshal to the same thing:
  ```yaml
  headers:
    "foo": "bar"
  
  headers:
  - name: "foo"
    value: "bar"
  ```
  
- `pdata/pprofile`: Update `SetFunction` to return the function's ID rather than update the Line (#14016, #14032)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Update `SetLink` to return the link's ID rather than update the Sample (#14016, #14031)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Update `SetMapping` to return the mapping's ID rather than update the Location (#14016, #14030)
- `pkg/otelcol`: Require a telemetry factory to be injected through otelcol.Factories (#4970)
  otelcol.Factories now has a required Telemetry field,
  which contains the telemetry factory to be used by the service.
  Set it to otelconftelemetry.NewFactory() for the existing behavior.
  
- `pkg/pdata`: Remove unused generated code from pprofile (#14073)
  Experimental package, ok to break since not used.

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce `SetStack` method (#14007)
- `pdata/xpdata`: Add high-level Entity API for managing entities attached to resources (#14042)
  Introduces `Entity`, `EntitySlice`, and `EntityAttributeMap` types that provide a user-friendly interface
  for working with resource entities. The new API ensures consistency between entity and resource attributes
  by sharing the underlying attribute map, and prevents attribute conflicts between entities. This API may
  eventually replace the generated protobuf-based API for better usability.
  

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `cmd/mdatagen`: Fix mdatagen generated_metrics for connectors (#12402)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.44.0/v0.138.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `pkg/xexporterhelper`: Remove definition of Sizer from public API and ability to configure. (#14001)
  Now that Request has both Items/Bytes sizes no need to allow custom sizers.
  
- `pkg/service`: The `service.Settings` type now requires a `telemetry.Factory` to be provided (#4970)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `pdata/pprofile`: Deprecated `PutAttribute` helper method (#14016, #14041)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Deprecated `PutLocation` helper method (#14019)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `all`: Add `keep_alives_enabled` option to ServerConfig to control HTTP keep-alives for all components that create an HTTP server. (#13783)
- `pkg/pdata`: Add pcommon.Map helper to add a key to the map if does not exists (#14023)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce `Equal` method on the `KeyValueAndUnit` type (#14041)
- `pkg/pdata`: Add `RemoveIf` method to primitive slice types (StringSlice, Int64Slice, UInt64Slice, Float64Slice, Int32Slice, ByteSlice) (#14027)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce `SetAttribute` helper method (#14016, #14041)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce `SetLocation` helper method (#14019)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce `Equal` method on the `Stack` type (#13952)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.43.0/v0.137.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `pkg/exporterhelper`: Remove all experimental symbols in exporterhelper (#11143)
  They have all been moved to xexporterhelper
  

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `all`: service/telemetry.TracesConfig is deprecated (#13904)
  This type alias has been added to otelconftelemetry.TracesConfig,
  where the otelconf-based telemetry implementation now lives.
  

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `all`: Mark configoptional as stable (#13403)
- `all`: Mark configauth module as 1.0 (#9476)
- `pkg/pdata`: Mark featuregate pdata.useCustomProtoEncoding as stable (#13883)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.42.0/v0.136.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `exporterhelper`: Remove deprecated function NewRequestsSizer (#13803)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Upgrade the OTLP protobuf definitions to version 1.8.0 (#13758, #13825, #13839)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Remove deprecated ProfilesDictionary method (#13858)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `exporterhelper`: Deprecate all experimental symbols in exporterhelper and move them to xexporterhelper (#11143)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `configoptional`: Add `GetOrInsertDefault` method to `configoptional.Optional` (#13856)
  This method inserts a default or zero value into a `None`/`Default` `Optional` before `Get`ting its inner value.
  
- `exporter`: Stabilize exporter module. (#12978)
  This does not stabilize the exporterhelper module or configuration
- `pdata`: Upgrade the OTLP protobuf definitions to version 1.8.0 (#13758)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.41.0/v0.135.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `pdata/pprofile`: Remove deprecated AddAttribute method (#13764)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `configmiddleware`: Stabilize `configmiddleware` module (#13422)
  This only stabilizes the configuration interface but does not stabilize the middlewares themselves or the way of implementing them.
- `xpdata`: Add experimental MapBuilder struct to optimize pcommon.Map construction (#13617)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.40.0/v0.134.0

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `exporterhelper`: Split exporterhelper into a separate module (#12985)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.39.0/v0.133.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `configgrpc`: Set `tcp` as the default transport type (#13657)
  gRPC is generally used with HTTP/2, so this will simplify usage for most components.

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `pdata/pprofile`: Deprecate Profiles.ProfilesDictionary in favor of Profiles.Dictionary. (#13644)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata`: Add support for local memory pooling for data objects. (#13678)
  This is still an early experimental (alpha) feature. Do not recommended to be used production. To enable use "--featuregate=+pdata.useProtoPooling"

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `configoptional`: Allow validating nested types (#13579)
  `configoptional.Optional` now implements `xconfmap.Validator`

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.38.0/v0.132.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `componenttest`: Remove `GetFactory` from the host returned by `NewNopHost` (#13577)
  This method is no longer part of the `component.Host` interface.

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `exporterhelper`: Provide an interface `queue_batch.Setting.MergeCtx` so users can control how context values are preserved or combined (#13320)
  By supplying a custom mergeCtx function, users can control how context values are preserved or combined.
  The default behavior is to preserve no context values.
  
- `pdata`: Generate Logs/Traces/Metrics/Profiles and p[log|trace|metric|profile]ExportResponse with pdatagen. (#13597)
  This change brings consistency on how these structs are written and remove JSON marshaling/unmarshaling hand written logic.
- `pdata`: Avoid unnecessary buffer copy when JSON marshal fails. (#13598)
- `pipeline`: Mark module as stable (#12831)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.37.0/v0.131.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `configgrpc`: Update optional fields to use `configoptional.Optional` field for optional values. (#13252, #13364)
  Specifically, the following fields have been updated to `configoptional`:
  - `KeepaliveServerConfig.ServerParameters` (`KeepaliveServerParameters` type)
  - `KeepaliveServerConfig.EnforcementPolicy` (`KeepaliveEnforcementPolicy` type)
  
- `xexporterhelper`: Remove deprecated NewProfilesExporter function from xexporterhelper package (#13391)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `consumererror`: Add new "Downstream" error marker (#13234)
  This new error wrapper type indicates that the error returned by a component's
  `Consume` method is not an internal failure of the component, but instead
  was passed through from another component further downstream.
  This is used internally by the new pipeline instrumentation feature to
  determine the `outcome` of a component call. This wrapper is not intended to
  be used by components directly.
  
- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce `Equal` method on the `Function` type (#13222)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce `Equal` method on the `Link` type (#13223)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Add new helper method `SetFunction` to set a new function on a line. (#13222)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Add new helper method `SetLink` to set a new link on a sample. (#13223)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Add new helper method `SetString` to set or retrieve the index of a value in the StringTable. (#13225)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.36.1/v0.130.1

<!-- previous-version -->

No API-only changes in this release.

## v1.36.0/v0.130.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `exporterhelper`: Use configoptional for sending_queue::batch field (#13345)
- `configgrpc`: Update optional fields to use `configoptional.Optional` field for optional values. (#13250, #13252)
  Components using `configgrpc` package may need to update config values.
- `confighttp`: Use configoptional.Optional in confighttp (#9478)
- `exporterhelper`: Remove sizer map in favor of items/bytes sizers. Request based is automatically supported. (#13262)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Remove field Profile.StartTime from pdata/pprofile (#13315)
  Remove Profile.StartTime from OTel Profiling signal.
- `exporterhelper`: Remove deprecated old batcher config (#13003)
- `exporter/otlp`: Remove deprecated batcher config from OTLP, use queuebatch (#13339)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `exporterhelper`: Deprecate NewRequestsSizer always supported. (#13262)
- `xexporterhelper`: Introduce NewProfiles method and deprecate NewProfilesExporter (#13372)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `consumererror`: Add `Error` type (#7047)
  This type can contain information about errors that allow components (e.g. exporters)
  to communicate error information back up the pipeline.
  
- `pdata`: Document that changing pcommon.Map (Remove/removeIf/Put*) invalidates Value references obtained via Get. (#13073)
- `cmd/mdatagen`: Add support for optional attribute (#12571)
- `exporterhelper`: Add support to configure a different Sizer for the batcher than the queue (#13313)
- `pdata`: Add support for the new resource-entity reference API as part of the experimental xpdata package. (#13264)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.35.0/v0.129.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `semconv`: Removing deprecated semconv package (#13071)
- `configgrpc,confighttp`: Unify return type of `NewDefault*Config` functions to return a struct instead of a pointer. (#13169)
- `exporterhelper`: QueueBatchEncoding interface is changed to support marshaling and unmarshaling of request context. (#13188)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce `Equal` method on the `Mapping` type (#13197)
- `configoptional`: Make unmarshaling into `None[T]` work the same as unmarshaling into `(*T)(nil)`. (#13168)
- `configoptional`: Add a confmap.Marshaler implementation for configoptional.Optional (#13196)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce `Equal` methods on the `Line` and `Location` types (#13150)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Add new helper method `SetMapping` to set a new mapping on a location. (#13197)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `confmap`: Distinguish between empty and nil values when marshaling `confmap.Conf` structs. (#13196)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.34.0/v0.128.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `exporterhelper`: Remove deprecated NewProfilesRequestExporter function from xexporterhelper package (#13157)
- `confighttp`: Remove pointer to field `cookies` in confighttp.ClientConfig (#13116)
- `otlpreceiver`: Use `configoptional.Optional` to define optional configuration sections in the OTLP receiver. Remove `Unmarshal` method. (#13119)
- `confighttp,configgrpc`: Rename `ClientConfig.TLSSetting` and `ServerConfig.TLSSetting` to `ClientConfig.TLS` and `ServerConfig.TLS`. (#13115)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Upgrade the OTLP protobuf definitions to version 1.7.0 (#13075)
  Note that the batcher is temporarily a noop.
- `pipeline`: Remove deprecated MustNewID[WithName] (#13139)

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `configoptional`: Add a new configoptional module to support optional configuration fields. (#12981)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata`: Introduce `MoveAndAppendTo` methods to the generated primitive slices (#13074)
- `pdata`: Upgrade the OTLP protobuf definitions to version 1.7.0 (#13075)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `confmap`: Correctly distinguish between `nil` and empty map values on the `ToStringMap` method (#13161)
  This means that `ToStringMap()` method can now return a nil map if the original value was `nil`.
  If you were not doing so already, make sure to check for `nil` before writing to the map to avoid panics.
  
- `confighttp`: Make the `NewDefaultServerConfig` function return a nil TLS config by default. (#13129)
  - The previous default was a TLS config with no certificates, which would fail at runtime.
  

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.33.0/v0.127.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `mdatagen`: Add context parameter for recording event to set traceID and spanID (#12571)
- `otlpreceiver`: Use wrapper type for URL paths (#13046)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `pipeline`: Deprecate MustNewID and MustNewIDWithName (#12831)
- `pdata/profile`: Replace AddAttribute with the PutAttribute helper method to modify the content of attributable records. (#12798)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `consumer/consumertest`: Add context to sinks (#13039)
- `cmd/mdatagen`: Add events in generated documentation (#12571)
- `confmap`: Add a `Conf.Delete` method to remove a path from the configuration map. (#13064)
- `confmap`: Support running Unmarshal hooks on nil values. (#12981)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.32.0/v0.126.0

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `configauth`: Deprecate `configauth.Authentication` in favor of `configauth.Config`. (#12875)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `cmd/mdatagen`: Add type definition for events in mdatagen (#12571)
- `cmd/mdatagen`: Add functions for processing structured events in mdatagen (#12571)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.31.0/v0.125.0

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `extensionauthtest`: Deprecate NewErrorClient in favor of NewErrClient. (#12874)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `xextension/storage`: ErrStorageFull error added to xextension/storage contract (#12925)
- `pdata`: Add MoveTo to pcommon.Value, only type missing this (#12877)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `pdata`: Fix MoveTo when moving to the same destination (#12887)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.30.0/v0.124.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `exporterbatcher`: Remove deprecated package exporterbatcher (#12780)
- `exporterqueue`: Remove deprecated package exporterqueue (#12779)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `mdatagen`: Add variable for metric name in mdatagen (#12459)
  Access metric name via `metadata.MetricsInfo.<metric-variable>.Name`
- `client`: Add support for iterating over client metadata keys (#12804)
- `service`: Adds the GetFactory interface to the hostcapabilities package (#12789)
- `cmd/mdatagen`: Add the foundational changes necessary for supporting logs data in `mdatagen` (#12571)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.29.0/v0.123.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `otlpreceiver/otlpexporter/otlphttpexporter`: Avoid using go embedded messages in Config (#12718)
- `exporterqueue`: Move Queue interface to internal, disallow alternative implementations (#12680)
- `extensionauth, configauth`: Remove deprecated types and functions from `extensionauth` and `configauth` packages. (#12672)
  This includes:
  - `extensionauth.NewClient`,
  - `extensionauth.ClientOption` and all its implementations,
  - `extensionauth.NewServer`,
  - `extensionauth.ServerOption` and all its implementations and
  - `configauth.Authenticator.GetClientAuthenticator`.
  
- `exporterhelper`: Remove deprecated converter types from exporterhelper (#12686)
- `exporterbatch`: Remove deprecated fields `min_size_items` and `max_size_items` from batch config. (#12684)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `exporterhelper`: Deprecate BatcherConfig, SizeConfig and WithBatcher in favor of the new QueueBatchConfig. (#12748)
- `exporterbatcher`: Deprecated Config, SizeConfig, SizerType, SizerType[Requests|Items|Bytes], NewDefaultConfig. Use alias from exporterhelper. (#12707)
- `exporterqueue`: Deprecated Config, NewDefaultConfig, Encoding, ErrQueueFull. Use alias from exporterhelper. (#12706)
- `exporterhelper`: Deprecate exporterhelper WithRequestQueue in favor of WithQueueBatch (#12679)
- `exporterhelper`: Deprecate `QueueConfig` in favor of `QueueBatchConfig`. (#12746)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `extensionauth`: Mark module as stable (#11006)
- `processor`: Mark module as stable. (#12677)
- `processorhelper`: Split processorhelper into a separate module. (#12678)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.28.1/v0.122.1

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.28.0/v0.122.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `auth, authtest`: Remove deprecated modules extension/auth and extension/auth/authtest (#12543)
  Use extension/extensionauth and extension/extensionauth/extensionauthtest instead.
  
- `extensionauth`: Remove deprecated methods from the `Func` types. (#12547)
- `extensiontest, connectortest, processortest, receivertest, scrapertest, exportertest`: Remove deprecated `NewNopSettingsWithType` functions, use `NewNopSettings` instead. (#12221)
- `extensionauthtest`: Remove the `extensionauthtest.MockClient` struct. (#12567)
  - Use `extensionauthtest.NewNopClient` to create a client with a noop implementation. 
  - Use `extensionauthtest.NewErrorClient` to create a client that always returns an error.
  - Implement the `extensionauth` interfaces for custom mock client implementations.
  
- `component/componenttest`: Remove the deprecated componenttest.TestTelemetry in favor of componenttest.Telemetry (#12419)
- `exporterhelper`: Remove the Request.Export function in favor of an equivalent request consume func in the New[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]Request (#12637)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `exporterhelper`: Deprecate per signal converter in favor of generic version (#12631)
- `extensionauth`: Deprecate `extensionauth.NewClient` and `extensionauth.NewServer`. (#12574)
  - Manually implement the interfaces instead.
  
- `configauth`: Deprecate `configauth.Authenticator.GetClientAuthenticator`. (#12574)
  - Use the per-protocol methods instead.
  

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `receiverhelper`: Split `receiverhelper` into a separate module (#28328)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `cmd/mdatagen`: Add `supportsSignal` func for `Metadata` type in `mdatagen`. (#12640)
- `receiver`: Mark module as stable (#12513)
- `pdata/pcommon`: Introduce `Equal()` method for comparison equality to `Value`, `ByteSlice`, `Float64Slice`, `Int32Slice`, `Int64Slice`, `StringSlice`, `Uint64Slice`, `Map` and `Slice` (#12594)
- `pdata`: Add iterator All method to pdata slices and map types. (#11982)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce AddAttribute helper method to modify the content of attributable records (#12206)

<!-- previous-version -->

## v1.27.0/v0.121.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `exporterqueue`: Remove exporterqueue.Factory in favor of the NewQueue function, and merge configs for memory and persistent. (#12509)
  As a side effect of this change, no alternative implementation of the queue are supported and the Queue interface will be hidden.
- `exporterhelper`: Update MergeSplit function signature to use the new SizeConfig (#12486)
- `extension, connector, processor, receiver, exporter, scraper`: Remove deprecated `Create*` methods from `Create*Func` types. (#12305)
  The `xconnector.CreateMetricsToProfilesFunc.CreateMetricsToProfiles` method has been removed without a deprecation.
  
- `component`: Remove deprecated function and interface `ConfigValidator` and `ValidateConfig`. (#11524)
  - Use `xconfmap.Validator` and `xconfmap.Validate` instead.
  
- `receiver, scraper, processor, exporter, extension`: Remove deprecated MakeFactoryMap functions in favor of generic implementation (#12222)
- `exporterhelper`: Change the signature of the exporterhelper.WithQueueRequest to accept Encoding instead of the Factory. (#12509)
- `component/componenttest`: Removing the deprecated `CheckReceiverMetrics` and `CheckReceiverTraces` functions. (#12185)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `componenttest`: Deprecated componenttest.TestTelemetry in favor of componenttest.Telemetry (#12419)
- `connector, exporter, extension, processor, receiver, scraper`: Add type parameter to `NewNopSettings` and deprecate `NewNopSettingsWithType` (#12305)
- `exporterhelper`: Deprecate MinSizeConfig and MaxSizeItems. (#12486)
- `extension/extensionauth`: Deprecate methods on `*Func` types. (#12480)
- `extension/auth, extension/auth/authtest`: Deprecate extension/auth and the related test module in favor of extension/extensionauth (#12478)

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `service/hostcapabilities`: create `service/hostcapabilities` module (#12296, #12375)
  Removes getExporters interface in service/internal/graph.
  Removes getModuleInfos interface in service/internal/graph.
  Creates interface ExposeExporters in service/hostcapabilities to expose GetExporters function.
  Creates interface ModuleInfo in service/hostcapabilities to expose GetModuleInfos function.
  

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `exporterhelper`: Adds the config API to support serialized bytes based batching (#3262)
- `configauth`: Add the `omitempty` mapstructure tag to struct fields (#12191)
  This results in unset fields not being rendered when marshaling.
- `confighttp`: Add the `omitempty` mapstructure tag to struct fields (#12191)
  This results in unset fields not being rendered when marshaling.
- `otelcol`: Converters are now available in the `components` command. (#11900, #12385)
- `extension`: Mark module as stable (#11005)
- `pcommon.Map`: preallocate go map in Map.AsRaw() (#12406)
- `exporterhelper`: Stabilize exporter.UsePullingBasedExporterQueueBatcher and remove old batch sender (#12425)
- `service`: Add the `omitempty` mapstructure tag to struct fields (#12191)
  This results in unset fields not being rendered when marshaling.

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `mdatagen`: Fix broken imports in the generated files. (#12298)
- `processor, connector, exporter, receiver`: Explicitly error out at component creation time if there is a type mismatch. (#12305)

## v1.26.0/v0.120.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `configauth`: Remove NewDefaultAuthentication (#12223)
  The value returned by this function will always cause an error on startup.
  In `configgrpc.Client/ServerConfig.Auth`, `nil` should be used instead to disable authentication.
  
- `otelcol`: Make the `ConfigProvider` interface a struct (#12297)
  Calls to `NewConfigProvider` will now return `*ConfigProvider`,
  but will otherwise work the same as before.
  
- `extension`: Remove `extension.Settings.ModuleInfo` (#12296)
  - The functionality is now available as an optional, hidden interface on `service`'s implementation of the `Host`
  
- `component`: Remove deprecated field `component.TelemetrySettings.MetricsLevel`. (#11061)
- `confighttp`: Add `ToClientOption` type and add it to signature of `ToClient` method. (#12353)
  - This has no use for now, it may be used in the future.
  
- `mdatagen`: Remove unused not_component config for mdatagen (#12237)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `component/componenttest`: Deprecate CheckReceiverMetrics in componenttest (#12185)
  Use the `metadatatest.AssertEqualMetric` series of functions instead of `obsreporttest.CheckReceiverMetrics`
- `component/componenttest`: Deprecate CheckReceiverTraces in componenttest (#12185)
  Use the `metadatatest.AssertEqualMetric` series of functions instead of `obsreporttest.CheckReceiverTraces`
- `component`: Deprecate `ConfigValidator` and `ValidateConfig` (#11524)
  Please use `Validator` and `Validate` respectively from `xconfmap`.
- `receiver, scraper, processor, exporter, extension`: Deprecate existing MakeFactoryMap functions in favor of generic implementation (#12222)
- `extension, connector, processor, receiver, exporter, scraper`: Deprecate `Create*` methods from `Create*Func` types. (#12305)
- `extensiontest, connectortest, processortest, receivertest, exportertest, scrapertest`: Deprecate `*test.NewNopSettings` in favor of `*test.NewNopSettingsWithType` (#12305)

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `xconfmap`: Create the xconfmap module and add the `Validator` interface and `Validate` function to facilitate config validation (#11524)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `configgrpc`: Add the `omitempty` mapstructure tag to struct fields (#12191)
  This results in unset fields not being rendered when marshaling.
- `confignet`: Add the `omitempty` mapstructure tag to struct fields (#12191)
  This results in unset fields not being rendered when marshaling.
- `configtls`: Add the `omitempty` mapstructure tag to struct fields (#12191)
  This results in unset fields not being rendered when marshaling.
- `consumer`: Clarify that data cannot be accessed after Consume* func is called. (#12284)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Introduce aggregation temporality constants (#12253)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `configgrpc`: Apply configured Headers automatically (#12307)
  configgrpc now calls metadata.AppendToOutgoingContext automatically in an interceptor.
  Components that were manually using metadata.NewOutgoingContext as a workaround no longer need to
  do so, unless they are overwriting or adding header keys.
  
- `configgrpc`: Set Auth to nil in NewDefaultClientConfig/NewDefaultServerConfig (#12223)
  The value that was used previously would always cause an error on startup.
  
- `exporterqueue`: Fix async queue to propagate cancellation all they way to the queue (#12282)
- `otlpreceiver`: Fix OTLP http receiver to correctly set Retry-After (#12367)
- `extension`: Explicitly error out at extension creation time if there is a type mismatch. (#12305)

## v1.25.0/v0.119.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `exporterhelper`: Change queue to embed the async consumers. (#12242)
- `exporterqueue`: Change Queue interface to return a callback instead of an index (#8122)
- `cmd/mdatagen`: Allow passing OTel Metric SDK options to the generated `SetupTelemetry` function. (#12166)
- `exporterhelper`: Rename exporter span signal specific attributes (e.g. "sent_spans" / "send_failed_span") to "items.sent" / "items.failed". (#12165)
- `component`: Change underlying type for `component.Kind` to be a struct. (#12214)
- `extension`: Change `extension.Extension` to be an interface that embeds `component.Component` instead of an alias (#11443)
- `component/componenttest`: Remove deprecated `CheckScraperMetrics` functions (#12183)
- `scraperhelper`: Remove deprecated ScrapperControllerOption and NewScraperControllerMetrics from scraperhelper. (#12147)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `metadatatest`: Deprecate metadatatest.Telemetry in favor of componenttest.Telemetry (#12218)
  metadatatest.Telemetry -> componenttest.Telemetry |
  metadatatest.SetupTelemetry -> componenttest.NewTelemetry |
  metadatatest.Telemetry.NewSettings -> metadatatest.NewSettings |
  metadatatest.Telemetry.AssertMetrics -> metadatatest.AssertEqual* |
  
- `component/componenttest`: Deprecate `CheckExporterEnqueue*` functions in componenttest (#12185)
  Use the `metadatatest.AssertEqualMetric` series of functions instead of `obsreporttest.CheckExporterEnqueue*` functions.
- `component/componenttest`: Deprecate CheckExporterLogs in componenttest (#12185)
  Use the `metadatatest.AssertEqualMetric` series of functions instead of `obsreporttest.CheckExporterLogs`
- `component/componenttest`: Deprecate CheckExporterMetricGauge in componenttest (#12185)
  Use the `metadatatest.AssertEqualMetric` series of functions instead of `obsreporttest.CheckReceiverMetricGauge`
- `component/componenttest`: Deprecate CheckExporterMetrics in componenttest (#12185)
  Use the `metadatatest.AssertEqualMetric` series of functions instead of `obsreporttest.CheckExporterMetrics`
- `component/componenttest`: Deprecate CheckExporterTraces in componenttest (#12185)
  Use the `metadatatest.AssertEqualMetric` series of functions instead of `obsreporttest.CheckExporterTraces`
- `component/componenttest`: Deprecate CheckReceiverLogs in componenttest (#12185)
  Use the `metadatatest.AssertEqualMetric` series of functions instead of `obsreporttest.CheckReceiverLogs`
- `mdatagen`: Make registration of callback for async metric always optional. (#12204)
  Deprecate `metadata.TelemetryBuilder.Init*` and `metadata.With*Callback` in favor of `metadata.TelemetryBuilder.Register*Callback`
- `component`: Deprecate `component.TelemetrySettings.MetricsLevel` in favor of using views and 'Enabled' method. (#12159)
  - Components will temporarily need the service to support using views.
  

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `componenttest`: Add helper to get a metric for componenttest.Telemetry (#12215)
- `componenttest`: Extract componenttest.Telemetry as generic struct for telemetry testing (#12151)
- `mdatagen`: Generate assert function for each metric in mdatagen (#12179)
- `metadatatest`: Generate NewSettings that accepts componenttest.Telemetry (#12216)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Add new helper method `FromAttributeIndices` to build a `pcommon.Map` out of `AttributeIndices`. (#12176)
- `scraper`: Support logs scraper (#12116)
- `component`: Allow `component.ValidateConfig` to recurse through all fields in a config object (#11524)
- `component`: Show path to invalid config in errors returned from `component.ValidateConfig` (#12108)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `mdatagen`: All register callbacks to async instruments can now be unregistered by calling `metadata.TelemetryBuilder.Shutdown()` (#12204)
- `mdatagen`: Fix bug where Histograms were marked as not supporting temporal aggregation (#12168)

## v1.24.0/v0.118.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `exporterqueue`: Change Queue Size and Capacity to return explicit int64. (#12076)
- `receiver/scraperhelper`: Removing the deprecated receiver/scraperhelper package (#12054)
- `processortest`: Revert the nop_processor.NewNopSettings change, as it is no longer needed (#11433)
- `experimental/storage`: Remove deprecated package/module experimental/storage (#12109)
- `mdatagen`: Remove deprecated generated_component_telemetry_test file from being generated and delete it. (#12068)
- `receivertest`: Remove deprecated receivertest.NewNopFactoryForType (#12110)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `componenttest`: Deprecate CheckScraperMetrics in componenttest (#12105)
  Use `metadatatest.AssertMetrics` instead of `obsreporttest.CheckScraperMetrics`
- `scraperhelper`: Deprecate `scraperhelper.NewScraperControllerReceiver` and `scraperhelper.ScraperControllerOption`. (#12103)
  Use `scraperhelper.NewMetricsController` instead of `scraperhelper.NewScraperControllerReceiver` | Use `scraperhelper.ScraperControllerOption` instead of `scraperhelper.ControllerOption`

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `exporterhelper`: Add capability for memory and persistent queue to block when add items (#12074)
- `scraper/scraperhelper`: Add obs_logs for scraper/scraperhelper (#12036)
  This change adds obs for logs in scraper/scraperhelper, also introduced new metrics for scraping logs.
- `mdatagen`: Add scraper component type support to mdatagen (#12092)
- `mdatagen`: Add tracing support in metadatatest (#12106)
- `exporterhelper`: Change persistent queue to not use sized channel, improve memory usage and simplify sized_channel. (#12060)
- `confighttp`: Added support for configuring compression levels. (#10467)
  A new configuration option called CompressionParams has been added to confighttp. | This allows users to configure the compression levels for the confighttp client.

## v1.23.0/v0.117.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `pdata/pprofile`: Remove duplicate Attributes field from profile (#11932)
- `connector`: Remove deprecated connectorprofiles module, use xconnector instead. (#11778)
- `consumererror`: Remove deprecated consumererrorprofiles module, use xconsumererror instead. (#11778)
- `consumer`: Remove deprecated consumerprofiles module, use xconsumer instead. (#11778)
- `exporterhelper`: Remove deprecated exporterhelperprofiles module, use xexporterhelper instead. (#11778)
- `exporter`: Remove deprecated exporterprofiles module, use xexporter instead. (#11778)
- `pipeline`: Remove deprecated pipelineprofiles module, use xpipeline instead. (#11778)
- `processorhelper`: Remove deprecated processorhelperprofiles module, use xprocessorhelper instead. (#11778)
- `processor`: Remove deprecated processorprofiles module, use xprocessor instead. (#11778)
- `receiver`: Remove deprecated receiverprofiles module, use xreceiver instead. (#11778)
- `exporterhelper`: Remove Merge function from experimental Request interface (#12012)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `mdatagen`: Deprecate component_test in favor of metadatatest (#11812)
- `receivertest`: Deprecate receivertest.NewNopFactoryForType (#11993)
- `extension/experimental`: Deprecate extension/experimental in favor of extension/xextension (#12010)
- `scraperhelper`: Move scraperhelper under scraper and in a separate module. (#11003)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `scrapertest`: Add scrapertest package in a separate module (#11988)
- `pdata`: Upgrade pdata to opentelemetry-proto v1.5.0 (#11932)

## v1.22.0/v0.116.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `component`: Remove deprecated TelemetrySettings.LeveledMeterProvider (#11811)
- `scraperhelper`: Remove deprecated scraperhelper.Scraper and helpers (#11803)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `connector`: Deprecate connectorprofiles module in favor of xconnector to allow adding more experimental data types. (#11778)
- `consumererror`: Deprecate consumererrorprofiles module in favor of xconsumererror to allow adding more experimental data types. (#11778)
- `consumer`: Deprecate consumerprofiles module in favor of xconsumer to allow adding more experimental data types. (#11778)
- `exporterhelper`: Deprecate exporterhelperprofiles module in favor of xexporterhelper to allow adding more experimental data types. (#11778)
- `exporter`: Deprecate exporterprofiles module in favor of xexporter to allow adding more experimental data types. (#11778)
- `pipeline`: Deprecate pipelineprofiles module in favor of xpipeline to allow adding more experimental data types. (#11778)
- `processorhelper`: Deprecate processorhelperprofiles module in favor of xprocessorhelper to allow adding more experimental data types. (#11778)
- `processor`: Deprecate processorprofiles module in favor of xprocessor to allow adding more experimental data types. (#11778)
- `receiver`: Deprecate receiverprofiles module in favor of xreceiver to allow adding more experimental data types. (#11778)
- `receiver/scrapererror`: Remove the receiver/scrapererror alias. (#11003)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `receiver/scraperhelper`: Add scraper for logs (#11238)

## v1.21.0/v0.115.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `extension/auth/authtest`: `authtest` is now its own module (#11465, #11705)
- `pdata/pprofile`: AttributeTable is now a slice rather than a map (#11706)
- `scraperhelper`: Remove deprecated scraperhelper funcs Scraper.ID, NewScraper, AddScraper. (#11710)
- `mdatagen`: Remove deprecated LeveledMeter from the generated code (#11696)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `component`: Mark `TelemetrySettings.LeveledMeterProvider` as deprecated (#11697)
- `receiver/scraper`: Move receiver/scrapererror package to scraper/scrapererror and deprecate original receiver/scrapererror package. (#11003)
- `scraperhelper`: Make Scraper compatible with the new scraper.Metrics (#11682)
  Deprecate scraperhelper.Scraper in favor of scraper.Metrics

## v1.20.0/v0.114.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `extensiontest`: Make extensiontest into its own module (#11463)
- `component`: Make componenttest into its own module (#11464)
- `expandconverter`: Remove deprecated expandvar converter (#11672)
- `exporter`: Remove deprecated funcs Create[*]Exporter and [*]ExporterStability (#11662)
- `exporterhelper`: Remove deprecated NewLogs[Request]Exporter funcs (#11661)
- `extension`: Remove deprecated funcs CreateExtension and ExtensionStability (#11663)
- `processortest`: Remove deprecated func NewUnhealthyProcessorCreateSettings (#11665)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `component`: Deprecate `TelemetrySettings.LeveledMeterProvider` and undo deprecation of `TelemetrySettings.MeterProvider` (#11061)
- `scraperhelper`: Deprecate Scraper.ID func, pass type when register Scraper (#11238)

## v1.19.0/v0.113.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `builder`: Remove deprecated flags from Builder (#11576)
  Here is the list of flags | --name, --description, --version, --otelcol-version, --go, --module

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `processorhelperprofiles`: Add processorhelperprofiles to support profiles signal (#11556)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `mdatagen`: Add newTelemetrySettings to be generated all the time even for pkg class (#11535)
- `debugexporter`: Add profiles support to debug exporter (#11155)
- `component`: Add UnmarshalText for StabilityLevel (#11520)

## v1.18.0/v0.112.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `service`: Change Host to not implement GetExportersWithSignal (#11444)
  Use Host.GetExporters if still needed.
- `componentstatus`: Remove deprecated `NewInstanceIDWithPipelineIDs`, `AllPipelineIDsWithPipelineIDs`, and `WithPipelineIDs`. Use `NewInstanceID`, `AllPipelineIDs` and `WithPipelines` instead. (#11363)
- `configgrpc`: Removed deprecated `ClientConfig.ToClientConnWithOptions`/`ServerConfig.ToServerWithOptions`. (#11359, #9480)
  These methods were renamed to `ClientConfig.ToClientConn`/`ServerConfig.ToServer` in v0.111.0.
- `connector`: Put connectortest in its own module (#11216)
- `exporter`: Disables setting batch option to batch sender directly. (#10368)
  Removed WithRequestBatchFuncs(BatcherOption) in favor of WithBatchFuncs(Option), where | BatcherOption is a function that operates on batch sender and Option is one that operates | on BaseExporter
- `exporter`: Made mergeFunc and mergeSplitFunc required method of exporter.Request (#10368)
  mergeFunc and mergeSplitFunc used to be part of the configuration pass to the exporter. Now it is changed | to be a method function of request.
- `componentprofiles`: Move componentprofiles to pipelineprofiles (#11421)
- `processor`: Put processortest in its own module (#11218)
- `receivertest`: Removed deprecated `NewNopFactoryForTypeWithSignal`. Use `NewNopFactoryForType` instead. (#11362)
- `processor`: Remove deprecated funcs from processor package (#11368)
- `receiver`: Remove deprecated funcs from receiver package (#11367)
- `processorhelper`: Remove deprecated funcs/types from processorhelper & componenttest (#11302)
- `service`: Remove deprecated `pipelines.ConfigWithPipelineID` and `Config.PipelinesWithPipelineID`. Use `pipelines.Config` and `Config.Pipelines` instead. (#11361)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `extension`: Deprecate funcs that repeat extension in name (#11413)
  Factory.CreateExtension -> Factory.Create |
  Factory.ExtensionStability -> Factory.Stability
  
- `exporter`: Deprecate funcs that repeat exporter in name (#11370)
  Factory.Create[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]Exporter -> Factory.Create[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles] |
  Factory.[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]ExporterStability -> Factory.[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]Stability
  

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `consumererrorprofiles`: Add new module consumererrorprofiles for consumer error profiles. (#11131)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `configcompression`: Add support for lz4 compression (#9128)
- `otlpexporter`: Add profiles support to OTLP exporter (#11435)
- `otlphttpexporter`: Add profiles support to OTLP HTTP exporter (#11450)

## v1.17.0/v0.111.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `service/telemetry`: Change default metrics address to "localhost:8888" instead of ":8888" (#11251)
  This behavior can be disabled by disabling the feature gate 'telemetry.UseLocalHostAsDefaultMetricsAddress'.
- `componentprofiles`: Removed deprecated `DataTypeProfiles`.  Use `SignalProfiles` instead. (#11312)
- `configgrpc`: Replace ToClientConn and ToServer with ToClientConnWithOptions and ToServerWithOptions. (#11271, #9480)
  `ClientConfig.ToClientConn` and `ServerConfig.ToServer` were deprecated in v0.110.0 in favor of
  `ClientConfig.ToClientConnWithOptions` and `ServerConfig.ToServerWithOptions` which use a more
  flexible option type. The original functions are now removed, and the new ones are renamed to the
  old names. The `WithOptions` names are kept as deprecated aliases for now.
  
- `exporterhelper`: Removed deprecated `QueueTimeout`/`TimeoutSettings` aliases in favor of `QueueConfig`/`TimeoutConfig`. (#11264, #6767)
  `NewDefaultQueueSettings` and `NewDefaultTimeoutSettings` have been similarly renamed.
- `exporterqueue`: Remove deprecated `Settings.DataType`. Use `Settings.Signal` instead. (#11305)
- `exportertest`: Remove deprecated `CheckConsumeContractParams.DataType`. Use `CheckConsumeContractParams.Signal` instead. (#11305)
- `component`: Removed deprecated `ErrDataTypeIsNotSupported`, `DataType`, `DataTypeTraces`, `DataTypeMetrics`, and `DataTypeLogs`.  Use `pipeline.ErrSignalNotSupported`, `pipeline.Signal`, `pipeline.SignalTraces`, `pipeline.SignalMetrics`, and `pipeline.SignalLogs` instead. (#11253)
- `pdata/pprofile`: Replace slices of values to slices of pointers for the `Mapping`, `Location`, `Line`, `Function`, `AttributeUnit`, `Link`, `Value`, `Sample` and `Labels` attributes. (#11339)
- `receivertest`: Remove deprecated `CheckConsumeContractParams.DataType`. Use `CheckConsumeContractParams.Signal` instead. (#11304)
- `scraperhelper`: Remove deprecated function `NewScraperWithComponentType`. (#11294)
- `processorhelper`: Remove deprecated funcs form processorhelper.ObsReport (#11289)
  The "otelcol_processor_dropped_log_records", "otelcol_processor_dropped_log_records" | and "otelcol_processor_dropped_spans" metrics are complete removed, before they were always record with 0 values.

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `componentstatus`: Deprecated `NewInstanceIDWithPipelineIDs`, `AllPipelineIDsWithPipelineIDs`, and `WithPipelineIDs`. Use `NewInstanceID`, `AllPipelineIDs`, and `WithPipelines` instead. (#11313)
- `processorhelper`: Deprecate unused and empty struct processorhelper.ObsReport (#11293)
- `processor`: Deprecate funcs that repeat "processor" in name (#11310)
  Factory.Create[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]Processor -> Factory.Create[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]
  Factory.[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]ProcessorStability -> Factory.[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]Stability
  
- `receiver`: Deprecate funcs that repeat "receiver" in name (#11287)
  Factory.Create[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]Receiver -> Factory.Create[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]
  Factory.[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]ReceiverStability -> Factory.[Traces|Metrics|Logs|Profiles]Stability
  
- `receivertest`: Deprecated `NewNopFactoryForTypeWithSignal`. Use `NewNopFactoryForType` instead. (#11304)
- `service`: Deprecates `Config.PipelinesWithPipelineID`, `pipelines.ConfigWithPipelineID` and `GetExportersWithSignal` interface implementation. Use `Config.Pipelines`, `pipelines.Config`, and `GetExporters` interface implementation instead. (#11303)

## v1.16.0/v0.110.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `otlpexporter`: The `TimeoutSettings` field in `otlpexporter.Config` was renamed to `TimeoutConfig`. (#11132)
- `connector`: Change `TracesRouterAndConsumer`, `NewTracesRouter`, `MetricsRouterAndConsumer`, `NewMetricsRouter`, `LogsRouterAndConsumer`, and `NewLogsRouter` to use `pipeline.ID` instead of `component.ID`. (#11204)
- `extension`: Remove deprecated extension interfaces. (#11043)
  They are now available in the `extensioncapabilities` module.
  

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `exporterhelper`: Deprecate TimeoutSettings/QueueSettings in favor of TimeoutConfig/QueueConfig. (#6767)
- `configgrpc`: Deprecate `ClientConfig.ToClientConn`/`ServerConfig.ToServer` in favor of `ToClientConnWithOptions`/`ToServerWithOptions` (#9480)
  Users providing a grpc.DialOption/grpc.ServerOption should now wrap them into
  a generic option with `WithGrpcDialOption`/`WithGrpcServerOption`.
  
- `componentprofiles`: Deprecates `DataTypeProfiles`. Use `SignalProfiles` instead. (#11204)
- `componentstatus`: Deprecates `NewInstanceID`, `AllPipelineIDs`, and `WithPipelines`. Use `NewInstanceIDWithPipelineIDs`, `AllPipelineIDsWithPipelineIDs`, and `WithPipelineIDs` instead. (#11204)
- `exporterqueue`: Deprecates `Settings.DataType`. Use `Settings.Signal` instead. (#11204)
- `service`: Deprecates `pipelines.Config`. Use `pipelines.ConfigWithPipelineID` instead. (#11204)
- `component`: Deprecates `DataType`, `DataTypeTraces`, `DataTypeMetrics`, and `DataTypeLogs`. Use `pipeline.Signal`, `SignalTraces`, `SignalMetrics`, and `SignalLogs` instead. (#11204)
- `service`: Deprecates service's implementation of `GetExporters` interface.  Use `GetExportersWithSignal` instead. (#11249)
- `scraperhelper`: Deprecate NewScraperWithComponentType, should use NewScraper (#11159)

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `pipeline`: Adds new `pipeline` module to house the concept of pipeline ID and Signal. (#11209)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata`: Add support to MoveTo for Map, allow avoiding copies (#11175)
- `options`: Avoid using private types in public APIs and also protect options to be implemented outside this module. (#11054)
- `mdatagen`: Avoid using private types in public APIs and also protect options to be implemented outside this module. (#11040)
- `consumertest`: Introduce SampleCount method in ProfilesSink struct. (#11225)
- `otlpreceiver`: Support profiles in the OTLP receiver (#11071)

## v1.15.0/v0.109.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `Remove `extensiontest` StatusWatcher helpers`: They were unused. They may be added back on a different module or after `componentstatus` is marked 1.0
 (#11044)
- `pprofile`: Change Profile ID field from a byte array to a custom data type (#11048)
- `connector`: Remove deprecated connector builder (#11019)
- `exporter`: Remove deprecated exporter builder (#11019)
- `extension`: Remove deprecated extension builder (#11019)
- `processor`: Remove deprecated processor builder (#11019)
- `receiver`: Remove deprecated receiver builder (#11019)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `configtelemetry`: Deprecating `TelemetrySettings.MeterProvider` in favour of `TelemetrySettings.LeveledMeterProvider` (#10912)
- `extension`: Deprecate `extension.ConfigWatcher`, `extension.PipelineWatcher` and `extension.Dependent` in favor of equivalents in the `extensioncapabilities` module. (#11000)
- `scraperhelper`: deprecate NewScraper, should use NewScraperWithComponentType (#11082)

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `extensioncapabilities`: Create a new module for optional extension capabilities. (#11000)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `connectorprofiles`: Add ProfilesRouterAndConsumer interface, and NewProfilesRouter method. (#11023)
- `pprofileotlp`: Introduce grpc service implementation of pprofileotlp (#11048)
- `pprofile`: Introduce marshalling and unmarshalling of pprofile data (#11048)
- `service`: Support profiles in the service package (#11024)

## v1.14.1/v0.108.1

## v1.14.0/v0.108.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `extensions`: Remove `StatusWatcher` interface.  Use `componentstatus.Watcher` instead. (#10777)
- `component`: Removed Status related types and functions.  Use `componentstatus` instead. (#10777)
- `component`: Remove `ReportStatus` from `TelemetrySettings`. Use `componentstatus.ReportStatus` instead. (#10777)
- `componentstatus`: Make componentstatus.InstanceID immutable. (#10494)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `scraperhelper`: deprecate NewObsReport, ObsReport, ObsReportSettings, scrapers should use NewScraperControllerReceiver (#10959)
- `mdatagen`: Deprecating generated `Meter` func in favour of `LeveledMeter` (#10939)
- `connector`: Deprecate connector.Builder, and move it into an internal package of the service module (#10784)
- `exporter`: Deprecate exporter.Builder, and move it into an internal package of the service module (#10783)
- `extension`: Deprecate extension.Builder, and move it into an internal package of the service module (#10785)
- `processor`: Deprecate processor.Builder, and move it into an internal package of the service module (#10782)
- `receiver`: Deprecate receiver.Builder, and move it into an internal package of the service module (#10781)

## v1.13.0/v0.107.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `otelcol`: Delete deprecated NewCommandMustSetProvider (#10778)
- `component`: Removes the deprecated `Host.GetFactory` method. (#10771)
- `otelcoltest`: The `otelcol.LoadConfig` method no longer sets the `expandconverter`. (#10510)
- `ocb`: Collectors built with OCB will no longer include the `expandconverter` (#10510)
- `exporterhelper`: Delete deprecated `exporterhelper.ObsReport` and `exporterhelper.NewObsReport` (#10779, #10592)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `expandconverter`: Deprecate `expandconverter`. (#10510)

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `componentstatus`: Adds new componentstatus module that will soon replace status content in component. (#10730)
- `connector/connectorprofiles`: Allow handling profiles in connector. (#10703)
- `exporter/exporterprofiles`: Allow handling profiles in exporter. (#10702)
- `processor/processorprofiles`: Allow handling profiles in processor. (#10691)
- `receiver/receiverprofiles`: Allow handling profiles in receiver. (#10690)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `confmap`: Check that providers have a correct scheme when building a confmap.Resolver. (#10786)
- `confighttp`: Add `NewDefaultCORSConfig` function to initialize the default `confighttp.CORSConfig` (#9655)

## v0.106.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `configauth`: removing deprecated methods GetServerAuthenticatorContext and GetClientAuthenticatorContext (#9808)
- `connector,exporter,receiver,extension,processor`: Remove deprecated funcs/structs (#10423)
  Remove the following funcs & structs:
  - connector.CreateSettings -> connector.Settings
  - connectortest.NewNopCreateSettings -> connectortest.NewNopSettings
  - exporter.CreateSettings -> exporter.Settings
  - exportertest.NewNopCreateSettings -> exportertest.NewNopSettings
  - extension.CreateSettings -> extension.Settings
  - extensiontest.NewNopCreateSettings -> extensiontest.NewNopSettings
  - processor.CreateSettings -> processor.Settings
  - processortest.NewNopCreateSettings -> processortest.NewNopSettings
  - receiver.CreateSettings -> receiver.Settings
  - receivertest.NewNopCreateSettings -> receivertest.NewNopSettings
  
- `component/componenttest`: Add optional ...attribute.KeyValue argument to TestTelemetry.CheckExporterMetricGauge. (#10593)
- `confighttp`: Auth data type signature has changed (#4806)
  As part of the linked PR, the `auth` attribute was moved from `configauth.Authentication` 
  to a new `AuthConfig`, which contains a `configauth.Authentication`. For end-users, this
  is a non-breaking change. For users of the API, create a new AuthConfig using the
  `configauth.Authentication` instance that was being used before.
  
- `mdatagen`: Remove WithAttributes option from the telemetry builder constructor. (#10608)
  Attribute sets for async instruments now can be set as options to callback setters and async instruments initializers.
  This allows each async instrument to have its own attribute set.
  
- `service/extensions`: Adds `Options` to `extensions.New`. (#10728)
  This is only a breaking change if you are depending on `extensions.New`'s signature. Calls to `extensions.New` are not broken.

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `component`: Deprecates Host.GetFactory. (#10709)

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `component/componentprofiles`: Add componentprofiles module. (#10525)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `exporter, processor, receiver`: Document factory functions. (#9323)
- `component`: Document status enums and New constructors (#9822)
- `confighttp, configgrpc`: Remove the experimental comment on `IncludeMetadata` in confighttp and configgrpc (#9381)
- `confighttp`: Add `confighttp.NewDefaultServerConfig()` to instantiate the default HTTP server configuration (#9655)
- `consumer/consumertest`: Allow testing profiles with consumertest. (#10692)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `confmap`: Fix wrong expansion of environment variables escaped with `$$`, e.g. `$${ENV_VAR}` and `$$ENV_VAR`. (#10713)
  This change fixes the issue where environment variables escaped with $$ were expanded. 
  The collector now converts `$${ENV_VAR}` to `${ENV_VAR}` and `$$ENV_VAR` to `$ENV_VAR` without further expansion.
  

## v1.12.0/v0.105.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `otelcol`: Obtain the Collector's effective config from otelcol.Config (#10139)
  `otelcol.Collector` will now marshal `confmap.Conf` objects from `otelcol.Config` itself.
- `otelcoltest`: Remove deprecated methods `LoadConfigWithSettings` and `LoadConfigAndValidateWithSettings` (#10512)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `configauth`: Deprecated `Authentication.GetClientAuthenticatorContext` and `Authentication.GetServerAuthenticatorContext` (#10578)
- `otelcol`: Deprecate `otelcol.ConfmapProvider` (#10139)
  `otelcol.Collector` will now marshal `confmap.Conf` objects from `otelcol.Config` itself.
- `otelcol`: Deprecate `(*otelcol.ConfigProvider).GetConfmap` (#10139)
  Call `(*confmap.Conf).Marshal(*otelcol.Config)` to get the Collector's configuration.
- `exporterhelper`: Deprecate the obsreport API in the exporterhelper package. (#10592)

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `consumer/consumerprofiles`: Allow handling profiles in consumer. (#10464)

## v1.11.0/v0.104.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `otelcol`: The `otelcol.NewCommand` now requires at least one provider be set. (#10436)
- `component/componenttest`: Added additional "inserted" count to `TestTelemetry.CheckProcessor*` methods. (#10353)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `otelcoltest`: Deprecates `LoadConfigWithSettings` and `LoadConfigAndValidateWithSettings`.  Use `LoadConfig` and `LoadConfigAndValidate` instead. (#10417)
- `otelcol`: The `otelcol.NewCommandMustSetProvider` is deprecated. Use `otelcol.NewCommand` instead. (#10436)

### 🚀 New components 🚀

- `otelcoltest`: Split off go.opentelemetry.io/collector/otelcol/otelcoltest into its own module (#10417)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata/pprofile`: Add pprofile wrapper to convert proto into pprofile. (#10401)
- `pdata/testdata`: Add pdata testdata for profiles. (#10401)

## v1.10.0/v0.103.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `component`: Remove deprecated `component.UnmarshalConfig` (#7102)
- `confighttp`: Use `confighttp.ServerConfig` as part of zpagesextension.Config. Previously the extension used `confignet.TCPAddrConfig` (#9368)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `connector`: Deprecate CreateSettings and NewNopCreateSettings (#9428)
  The following methods are being renamed:
  - connector.CreateSettings -> connector.Settings
  - connector.NewNopCreateSettings -> connector.NewNopSettings
  
- `exporter`: Deprecate CreateSettings and NewNopCreateSettings (#9428)
  The following methods are being renamed:
  - exporter.CreateSettings -> exporter.Settings
  - exporter.NewNopCreateSettings -> exporter.NewNopSettings
  
- `extension`: Deprecate CreateSettings and NewNopCreateSettings (#9428)
  The following methods are being renamed:
  - extension.CreateSettings -> extension.Settings
  - extension.NewNopCreateSettings -> extension.NewNopSettings
  
- `processor`: Deprecate CreateSettings and NewNopCreateSettings (#9428)
  The following methods are being renamed:
  - processor.CreateSettings -> processor.Settings
  - processor.NewNopCreateSettings -> processor.NewNopSettings
  
- `receiver`: Deprecate CreateSettings and NewNopCreateSettings (#9428)
  The following methods are being renamed:
  - receiver.CreateSettings -> receiver.Settings
  - receiver.NewNopCreateSettings -> receiver.NewNopSettings
  
- `configauth`: Deprecate `GetClientAuthenticator` and `GetServerAuthenticator`, use `GetClientAuthenticatorContext` and `GetServerAuthenticatorContext` instead. (#9808)
- `confighttp`: Deprecate `ClientConfig.CustomRoundTripper` (#8627)
  Set the `Transport` field on the `*http.Client` object returned from `(ClientConfig).ToClient` instead.
- `filter`: Deprecate the `filter.CombinedFilter` struct (#10348)
- `otelcol`: Deprecate `otelcol.NewCommand`. Use `otelcol.NewCommandMustProviderSettings` instead. (#10359)
- `otelcoltest`: Deprecate `LoadConfig` and `LoadConfigAndValidate`. Use `LoadConfigWithSettings` and `LoadConfigAndValidateWithSettings` instead (#10359)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `confmap`: Adds `confmap.Retrieved.AsString` method that returns the configuration value as a string (#9532)
- `confmap`: Adds `confmap.NewRetrievedFromYAML` helper to create `confmap.Retrieved` values from YAML bytes (#9532)

## v0.102.1

No API-only changes on this release. **This release addresses [GHSA-c74f-6mfw-mm4v](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/security/advisories/GHSA-c74f-6mfw-mm4v) for `configgrpc`.**

## v1.9.0/v0.102.0

**This release addresses [GHSA-c74f-6mfw-mm4v](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/security/advisories/GHSA-c74f-6mfw-mm4v) for `confighttp`.**

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `otelcol`: Remove deprecated `ConfigProvider` field from `CollectorSettings` (#10281)
- `exporterhelper`: remove deprecated RequestMarshaler & RequestUnmarshaler types (#10283)
- `service`: remove deprecated Telemetry struct and New func (#10285)
- `configtls`: remove deprecated LoadTLSConfigContext funcs (#10283)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `component`: Deprecate `component.UnmarshalConfig`, use `(*confmap.Conf).Unmarshal(&intoCfg)` instead. (#7102)
- `service/telemetry`: Deprecate telemetry.New in favor of telemetry.NewFactory (#4970)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `confmap`: Allow setting a default Provider on a Resolver to use when `${}` syntax is used without a scheme (#10182)
- `pdata`: Introduce string and int64 slices to pcommon (#10148)
- `pdata`: Introduce generated experimental pdata for profiling signal. (#10195)
- `confmap`: Remove top level condition when considering struct as Unmarshalers (#7101)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `otelcol`: Update validate command to use the new configuration options (#10203)

## v1.8.0/v0.101.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `confighttp`: Removes deprecated functions `ToClientContext`, `ToListenerContext`, and `ToServerContext`. (#10138)
- `confmap`: Deprecate `NewWithSettings` for all Providers and `New` for all Converters (#10134)
  Use `NewFactory` instead for all affected modules.
- `confmap`: Remove deprecated `Providers` and `Converters` from `confmap.ResolverSettings` (#10173)
  Use `ProviderSettings` and `ConverterSettings` instead.

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `otelcol`: Add explicit mapstructure tags to main configuration struct (#10152)
- `confmap`: Support string-like types as map keys when marshaling (#10137)

## v1.7.0/v0.100.0

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `configgrpc`: Adds `NewDefault*` functions for all the config structs. (#9654)
- `exporterqueue`: Expose ErrQueueIsFull so upstream components can retry or apply backpressure. (#10070)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `mdatagen`: Call connectors with routers to be the same as the service graph (#10079)

## v1.6.0/v0.99.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `component`: Removed deprecated function `GetExporters` from `component.Host` interface (#9987)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `confighttp`: deprecate ToClientContext, ToServerContext, ToListenerContext, replaced by ToClient, ToServer, ToListener (#9807)
- `configtls`: Deprecates `ClientConfig.LoadTLSConfigContext` and `ServerConfig.LoadTLSConfigContext`, use `ClientConfig.LoadTLSConfig` and `ServerConfig.LoadTLSConfig` instead. (#9945)
- `confmap`: Deprecate the `Providers` and `Converters` fields in `confmap.ResolverSettings` (#9516)
Use the `ProviderFactories` and `ConverterFactories` fields instead.

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `configauth`: Adds `NewDefault*` functions for all the config structs. (#9821)
- `configtls`: Adds `NewDefault*` functions for all the config structs. (#9658)
- `pmetric`: Support metric.metadata in pdata/pmetric (#10006)

## v1.5.0/v0.98.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `component`: Restricts maximum length for `component.Type` to 63 characters. (#9872)
- `configgrpc`: Remove deprecated `ToServerContext`, use `ToServer` instead. (#9836)
- `configgrpc`: Remove deprecated `SanitizedEndpoint`. (#9836)
- `configtls`: Remove Deprecated `TLSSetting`, `TLSClientSetting`, and `TLSServerSetting`. (#9786)
- `configtls`: Rename `TLSSetting` to `Config` on `ClientConfig` and `ServerConfig`. (#9786)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `confighttp`: Deprecate `ToClient`,`ToListener`and `ToServer` use `ToClientContext`,`ToListenerContext` and `ToServerContext`instead. (#9807)
- `configtls`: Deprecate `ClientConfig.LoadTLSConfig` and `ServerConfig.LoadTLSConfig`, use `ClientConfig.LoadTLSConfigContext` and `ServerConfig.LoadTLSConfigContext` instead. (#9811)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- Introduce new module for generating pdata: pdata/testdata (#9886)
- `exporterhelper`: Make the `WithBatcher` option available for regular exporter helpers based on OTLP data type. (#8122)
  Now, `WithBatcher` can be used with both regular exporter helper (e.g. NewTracesExporter) and the request-based exporter 
  helper (e.g. NewTracesRequestExporter). The request-based exporter helpers require `WithRequestBatchFuncs` option 
  providing batching functions. 
  
- `confmap`: Creates a logger in the confmap.ProviderSettings and uses it to log when there is a missing or blank environment variable referenced in config. For now the noop logger is used everywhere except tests. (#5615)

## v1.4.0/v0.97.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `configgrpc`: Remove deprecated `ToServer` function. (#9787)
- `confignet`: Change `Transport` field from `string` to `TransportType` (#9385)
- `component`: Change underlying type of `component.Type` to an opaque struct. (#9208)
- `obsreport`: Remove deprecated obsreport/obsreporttest package. (#9724)
- `component`: Remove deprecated error `ErrNilNextConsumer` (#9322)
- `connector`: Remove `LogsRouter`, `MetricsRouter` and `TracesRouter`. Use `LogsRouterAndConsumer`, `MetricsRouterAndConsumer`, `TracesRouterAndConsumer` respectively instead. (#9095)
- `receiver`: Remove deprecated struct `ScraperControllerSettings` and function `NewDefaultScraperControllerSettings` (#6767)
- `confmap`: Remove deprecated `provider.New` methods, use `NewWithSettings` moving forward. (#9443)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `configgrpc`: Deprecated `ToServerContext`, use `ToServer` instead. (#9787)
- `configgrpc`: Deprecate `SanitizedEndpoint` (#9788)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `exporterhelper`: Add experimental batching capabilities to the exporter helper (#8122)
- `confignet`: Adds `NewDefault*` functions for all the config structs. (#9656)
- `configtls`: Validates TLS min_version and max_version (#9475)
  Introduces `Validate()` method in TLSSetting.
- `exporterhelper`: Invalid exporterhelper options now make the exporter creation error out instead of panicking. (#9717)
- `components`: Give NoOp components a unique name (#9637)

## v1.3.0/v0.96.0

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `configgrpc`: Deprecates `ToServer`.  Use `ToServerContext` instead. (#9624)
- `component`: deprecate component.ErrNilNextConsumer (#9526)
- `configtls`: Rename TLSClientSetting, TLSServerSetting, and TLSSetting based on the naming convention used in other config packages. (#9474)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `receivertest`: add support for metrics in contract checker (#9551)

## v1.2.0/v0.95.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `all`: Bump minimum go version to go 1.21 (#9507)
- `service/telemetry`: Delete generated_config types, use go.opentelemetry.io/contrib/config types instead (#9546)
- `configcompression`: Remove deprecated `configcompression` types, constants and methods. (#9388)
- `component`: Remove `host.ReportFatalError` (#6344)
- `configgrpc`: Remove deprecated `configgrpc.ServerConfig.ToListener` (#9481)
- `confmap`: Remove deprecated `confmap.WithErrorUnused` (#9484)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `confignet`: Deprecate `confignet.NetAddr` and `confignet.TCPAddr` in favor of `confignet.AddrConfig` and `confignet.TCPAddrConfig`. (#9509)
- `config/configgrpc`: Deprecate `configgrpc.ClientConfig.SanitizedEndpoint`, `configgrpc.ServerConfig.ToListener` and `configgrpc.ServerConfig.ToListenerContext` (#9481, #9482)
- `scraperhelper`: Deprecate ScraperControllerSettings, use ControllerConfig instead (#6767)

## v1.1.0/v0.94.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `confignet`: Remove deprecated `DialContext` and `ListenContext` functions (#9363)
- `confmap/converter/expandconverter`: Add `confmap.ConverterSettings` argument to experimental `expandconverter.New` function. (#5615, #9162)
  - The `confmap.ConverterSettings` struct currently has no fields. It will be used to pass a logger.
  
- `component`: Remove deprecated funcs and types (#9283)
- `otlpexporter`: Config struct is moving from embedding the deprecated GRPCClientSettings struct to using ClientConfig instead. (#6767)
- `otlphttpexporter`: otlphttpexporter.Config embeds the struct confighttp.ClientConfig instead of confighttp.HTTPClientSettings (#6767)
- `otlpreceiver`: HTTPConfig struct is moving from embedding the deprecated ServerSettings struct to using HTTPServerConfig instead. (#6767)
- `component`: Validate component.Type at creation and unmarshaling time. (#9208)
  - A component.Type must start with an ASCII alphabetic character and can only contain ASCII alphanumeric characters and '_'.
  

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `configcompressions`: Deprecate `IsCompressed`.  Use `CompressionType.IsCompressed instead` instead. (#9435)
- `configcompression`: Deprecate `CompressionType`, use `Type` instead. (#9416)
- `confighttp`: Deprecate CORSSettings, use CORSConfig instead (#6767)
- `configgrpc`: Deprecate `ToListener` function in favor of `ToListenerContext` (#9389)
- `configgrpc`: Deprecate GRPCServerSettings, use ServerConfig instead (#6767)
- `confighttp`: Deprecate HTTPClientSettings, use ClientConfig instead (#6767)
- `confighttp`: Deprecate HTTPServerSettings, use ServerConfig instead (#6767)
- `confmap/provider`: Deprecate <provider>.New in favor of <provider>.NewWithSettings for all core providers (#5615, #9162)
  - NewWithSettings now takes an empty confmap.ProviderSettings struct. This will be used to pass a logger in the future.
  

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `exporter/exporterhelper`: Add API for enabling queue in the new exporter helpers. (#7874)
  The following experimental API is introduced in exporter package:
    - `exporterhelper.WithRequestQueue`: a new exporter helper option for using a queue.
    - `exporterqueue.Queue`: an interface for queue implementations.
    - `exporterqueue.Factory`: a queue factory interface, implementations of this interface are intended to be used with WithRequestQueue option.
    - `exporterqueue.Settings`: queue factory settings.
    - `exporterqueue.Config`: common configuration for queue implementations.
    - `exporterqueue.NewDefaultConfig`: a function for creating a default queue configuration.
    - `exporterqueue.NewMemoryQueueFactory`: a new factory for creating a memory queue.
    - `exporterqueue.NewPersistentQueueFactory: a factory for creating a persistent queue.
  
- `featuregate`: Add the `featuregate.ErrAlreadyRegistered` error, which is returned by `featuregate.Registry`'s `Register` when adding a feature gate that is already registered. (#8622)
  Use `errors.Is` to check for this error.
  

## v0.93.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `bug_fix`: Implement `encoding.BinaryMarshaler` interface to prevent `configopaque` -> `[]byte` -> `string` conversions from leaking the value (#9279)
- `configopaque`: configopaque.String implements `fmt.Stringer` and `fmt.GoStringer`, outputting [REDACTED] when formatted with the %s, %q or %#v verbs` (#9213)
  This may break applications that rely on the previous behavior of opaque strings with `fmt.Sprintf` to e.g. build URLs or headers.
  Explicitly cast the opaque string to a string before using it in `fmt.Sprintf` to restore the previous behavior.
  
- `all`: Remove obsolete "// +build" directives (#9304)
- `connectortest`: Remove deprecated connectortest router helpers. (#9278)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `obsreporttest`: deprecate test funcs/structs (#8492)
  The following methods/structs have been moved from obsreporttest to componenttest:
  - obsreporttest.TestTelemetry -> componenttest.TestTelemetry
  - obsreporttest.SetupTelemetry -> componenttest.SetupTelemetry
  - obsreporttest.CheckScraperMetrics -> TestTelemetry.CheckScraperMetrics
  - obsreporttest.TestTelemetry.TelemetrySettings -> componenttest.TestTelemetry.TelemetrySettings()
  
- `confignet`: Deprecates `DialContext` and `ListenContext` functions. Use `Dial` and `Listen` instead. (#9258)
  Unlike the previous `Dial` and `Listen` functions, the new `Dial` and `Listen` functions take a `context.Context` like `DialContext` and `ListenContext`.

## v1.0.1/v0.92.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `otlpexporter`: Change Config members names to use Config suffix. (#9091)
- `component`: Remove deprecated unused TelemetrySettingsBase (#9145)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `confignet`: Deprecates the `Dial` and `Listen` functions in favor of `DialContext` and `ListenContext`. (#9163)
- `component`: Deprecate unnecessary type StatusFunc (#9146)

## v0.91.0

## v1.0.0/v0.90.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `exporterhelper`: Replace converter interface with function in the new experimental exporter helper. (#8122)
- `featuregate`: Remove deprecate function `featuregate.NewFlag` (#8727)
  Use `featuregate.Registry`'s `RegisterFlags` method instead.

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `telemetry`: deprecate jsonschema generated types (#15009)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata`: Add ZeroThreshold field to exponentialHistogramDataPoint in pmetric package. (#8802)

## v1.0.0-rcv0018/v0.89.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `otelcol`: CollectorSettings.Factories now expects: `func() (Factories, error)` (#8478)
- `exporter/exporterhelper`: The experimental Request API is updated. (#7874)
  - `Request` interface now includes ItemsCount() method.
  - `RequestItemsCounter` is removed.
  - The following interfaces are added:
    - Added an optional interface for handling errors that occur during request processing `RequestErrorHandler`.
    - Added a function to unmarshal bytes into a Request `RequestUnmarshaler`.
    - Added a function to marshal a Request into bytes `RequestMarshaler`
  

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `featuregate`: Deprecate `featuregate.NewFlag` in favor of `featuregate.Registry`'s `RegisterFlags` method (#8727)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `featuregate`: Add validation for feature gates ID, URL and versions. (#8766)
  Feature gates IDs are now explicitly restricted to ASCII alphanumerics and dots.
  

## v1.0.0-rcv0017/v0.88.0

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata`: Add IsReadOnly() method to p[metrics|logs|traces].[Metrics|Logs|Spans] pdata structs allowing to check if the struct is read-only. (#6794)

## v1.0.0-rcv0016/v0.87.0

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `pdata`: Introduce API to control pdata mutability (#6794)
  This change introduces new API pdata methods to control the mutability:
  - p[metric|trace|log].[Metrics|Traces|Logs].MarkReadOnly() - marks the pdata as read-only. Any subsequent
    mutations will result in a panic.
  - p[metric|trace|log].[Metrics|Traces|Logs].IsReadOnly() - returns true if the pdata is marked as read-only.
  Currently, all the data is kept mutable. This API will be used by fanout consumer in the following releases. 

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `obsreport`: remove methods/structs deprecated in previous release. (#8492)
- `extension`: remove deprecated Configs and Factories (#8631)

## v1.0.0-rcv0015/v0.86.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `service`: remove deprecated service.PipelineConfig (#8485)

### 🚩 Deprecations 🚩

- `obsreporttest`: deprecate To*CreateSettings funcs in obsreporttest (#8492)
  The following TestTelemetry methods have been deprecated. Use structs instead:
  -  ToExporterCreateSettings -> exporter.CreateSettings
  -  ToProcessorCreateSettings -> processor.CreateSettings
  -  ToReceiverCreateSettings -> receiver.CreateSettings
  
- `obsreport`: Deprecating `obsreport.Exporter`, `obsreport.ExporterSettings`, `obsreport.NewExporter` (#8492)
  These deprecated methods/structs have been moved to exporterhelper:
  - `obsreport.Exporter` -> `exporterhelper.ObsReport`
  - `obsreport.ExporterSettings` -> `exporterhelper.ObsReportSettings`
  - `obsreport.NewExporter` -> `exporterhelper.NewObsReport`
  
- `obsreport`: Deprecating `obsreport.BuildProcessorCustomMetricName`, `obsreport.Processor`, `obsreport.ProcessorSettings`, `obsreport.NewProcessor` (#8492)
  These deprecated methods/structs have been moved to processorhelper:
  - `obsreport.BuildProcessorCustomMetricName` -> `processorhelper.BuildCustomMetricName`
  - `obsreport.Processor` -> `processorhelper.ObsReport`
  - `obsreport.ProcessorSettings` -> `processorhelper.ObsReportSettings`
  - `obsreport.NewProcessor` -> `processorhelper.NewObsReport`
  
- `obsreport`: Deprecating obsreport scraper and receiver API (#8492)
  These deprecated methods/structs have been moved to receiverhelper and scraperhelper:
  - `obsreport.Receiver` -> `receiverhelper.ObsReport`
  - `obsreport.ReceiverSettings` -> `receiverhelper.ObsReportSettings`
  - `obsreport.NewReceiver` -> `receiverhelper.NewObsReport`
  - `obsreport.Scraper` -> `scraperhelper.ObsReport`
  - `obsreport.ScraperSettings` -> `scraperhelper.ObsReportSettings`
  - `obsreport.NewScraper` -> `scraperhelper.NewObsReport`
  

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `otelcol`: Splitting otelcol into its own module. (#7924)
- `service`: Split service into its own module (#7923)

## v0.85.0

## v0.84.0

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `exporter/exporterhelper`: Introduce a new exporter helper that operates over client-provided requests instead of pdata (#7874)
  The following experimental API is introduced in exporter/exporterhelper package:
    - `NewLogsRequestExporter`: a new exporter helper for logs.
    - `NewMetricsRequestExporter`: a new exporter helper for metrics.
    - `NewTracesRequestExporter`: a new exporter helper for traces.
    - `Request`: an interface for client-defined requests.
    - `RequestItemsCounter`: an optional interface for counting the number of items in a Request.
    - `LogsConverter`: an interface for converting plog.Logs to Request.
    - `MetricsConverter`: an interface for converting pmetric.Metrics to Request.
    - `TracesConverter`: an interface for converting ptrace.Traces to Request.
    All the new APIs are intended to be used by exporters that need to operate over client-provided requests instead of pdata.
  
- `otlpreceiver`: Export HTTPConfig as part of the API for creating the otlpreceiver configuration. (#8175)
  Changes signature of receiver/otlpreceiver/config.go type httpServerSettings to HTTPConfig.

## v0.83.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `all`: Remove go 1.19 support, bump minimum to go 1.20 and add testing for 1.21 (#8207)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `changelog`: Generate separate changelogs for end users and package consumers (#8153)
