[comment]: <> (Code generated by mdatagen. DO NOT EDIT.)

# batch

## Internal Telemetry

The following telemetry is emitted by this component.

### otelcol_processor_batch_batch_send_size

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_batch_batch_send_size if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of units in the batch

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- |
| {units} | Histogram | Int |

### otelcol_processor_batch_batch_send_size_bytes

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_batch_batch_send_size_bytes if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of bytes in batch that was sent. Only available on detailed level.

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- |
| By | Histogram | Int |

### otelcol_processor_batch_batch_size_trigger_send

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_batch_batch_size_trigger_send if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of times the batch was sent due to a size trigger

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type | Monotonic |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- | --------- |
| {times} | Sum | Int | true |

### otelcol_processor_batch_metadata_cardinality

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_batch_metadata_cardinality if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of distinct metadata value combinations being processed

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type | Monotonic |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- | --------- |
| {combinations} | Sum | Int | false |

### otelcol_processor_batch_timeout_trigger_send

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_batch_timeout_trigger_send if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of times the batch was sent due to a timeout trigger

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type | Monotonic |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- | --------- |
| {times} | Sum | Int | true |
