[comment]: <> (Code generated by mdatagen. DO NOT EDIT.)

# memory_limiter

## Internal Telemetry

The following telemetry is emitted by this component.

### otelcol_processor_accepted_log_records

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_accepted_log_records if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of log records successfully pushed into the next component in the pipeline. [deprecated since v0.110.0]

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type | Monotonic |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- | --------- |
| {records} | Sum | Int | true |

### otelcol_processor_accepted_metric_points

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_accepted_metric_points if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of metric points successfully pushed into the next component in the pipeline. [deprecated since v0.110.0]

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type | Monotonic |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- | --------- |
| {datapoints} | Sum | Int | true |

### otelcol_processor_accepted_spans

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_accepted_spans if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of spans successfully pushed into the next component in the pipeline. [deprecated since v0.110.0]

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type | Monotonic |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- | --------- |
| {spans} | Sum | Int | true |

### otelcol_processor_refused_log_records

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_refused_log_records if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of log records that were rejected by the next component in the pipeline. [deprecated since v0.110.0]

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type | Monotonic |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- | --------- |
| {records} | Sum | Int | true |

### otelcol_processor_refused_metric_points

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_refused_metric_points if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of metric points that were rejected by the next component in the pipeline. [deprecated since v0.110.0]

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type | Monotonic |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- | --------- |
| {datapoints} | Sum | Int | true |

### otelcol_processor_refused_spans

Note: The name is otelcol.processor_refused_spans if the `telemetry.ownMetricsUsePeriodPrefix` feature gate is enabled.

Number of spans that were rejected by the next component in the pipeline. [deprecated since v0.110.0]

| Unit | Metric Type | Value Type | Monotonic |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------- | --------- |
| {spans} | Sum | Int | true |
